b. The one one of attraction
Repulsion is the fragmentation of the one, ﬁrst into the many of which it
is the negative relating, since they presuppose each other as each existent;
it is only the ought of ideality; this ideality will, however, be realized in
attraction. Repulsion passes over into attraction, the many ones into one
one. Both, repulsion and attraction, are at ﬁrst distinguished from each
other, repulsion as the reality of the ones, attraction as their posited ideality.
Attraction refers to repulsion by having it for a presupposition. Repulsion
21.162
delivers the material for attraction. If there were no ones, there would
be nothing to attract; the representation of continuing attraction, of the
consumption of the ones, presupposes an equally continuing generation
of the ones; the sense representation of spatial attraction gives continuity
to the ﬂow of ones to be attracted; to replace the atoms that vanish at the
point of attraction, another multitude comes forth from the void, inﬁnitely
if one so wishes. If attraction were represented as accomplished, that is,
the many as brought to the point of the one one, the result would be just
an inert one, no longer any attraction. The ideality immediately present in
attraction still also has in it the determination of the negation of itself, the
many ones to which it refers; attraction is inseparable from repulsion.
To attract pertains at ﬁrst in equal measure to each of the many ones as
immediately present; none has advantage over an other; what would result
then is an equilibrium in the attraction, or more precisely, an equilibrium
in the attraction and the repulsion themselves, and an inert state of rest
without any ideality present there. But there can be no question here of
any such immediately present one taking precedence over another, for
this would presuppose a determinate distinction between them; attraction
is rather the positing of the given lack of distinction among the ones.
Attraction is itself the positing in the ﬁrst place of a one distinct from other
ones; these are only the immediate ones that are to preserve themselves
through repulsion; through their posited negation, however, what proceeds
is the one of attraction which is therefore determined as the mediated one,
the one posited as one. The ﬁrst ones, as immediate, do not in their ideality
return into themselves, but have this ideality each in another.
The one one is, however, ideality that has been realized, posited in the
one; it attracts through the mediation of repulsion; it contains in itself this
mediation as its determination. It thus does not swallow the attracted ones
within it as into one point, that is, does not sublate them abstractly. Since
it contains repulsion in its determination, the latter equally preserves the
ones as many within it; by its attracting, it musters, so to speak, something

142
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
before it, gains an area or a ﬁlling. Thus there is in it the unity of repulsion
and attraction in general.
