
=== Unit 21 ===
a. The one within74
Within it, the one just is; this, its being, is not an existence, not a deter-
mination as reference to an other, not a constitution; it is rather its having
negated this circle of categories. The one is not capable, therefore, of
becoming any other; it is unalterable.
It is indeterminate, yet no longer like being; its indeterminateness is the
determinateness of self-reference, absolutely determined being; posited in-
itselfness. As negation which, in accordance with its concept, is self-referring,
it has distinction in it: it directs away from itself towards another, but this
direction is immediately reversed, because, according to this moment of
self-determining, there is no other to which it would be addressed, and the
directing reverts back to itself.
In this simple immediacy, even the mediation of existence and ideality,
and with it all diversity and manifoldness, have vanished. In the one there is
nothing; this nothing, the abstraction of self-reference, is here distinguished
from the in-itselfness of the one; it is a posited nothing, for this in-itselfness
no longer has the simplicity of the something, but, as mediation, has
rather the determination of being concrete; taken in abstraction, it is
indeed identical with the one, but different from its determination. So this
nothing, posited as in the one, is the nothing as the void. – The void is thus
the quality of the one in its immediacy.
21.153

=== Unit 22 ===
b. The one and the void
The one is the void as the abstract self-reference of negation. But the void,
as nothing, is absolutely diverse from the simple immediacy of the one,
from the being of the latter which is also afﬁrmative, and because the two
stand in one single reference, namely to the one, their diversity is posited;
74 Das Eins an ihm selbst.

134
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
however, as distinct from the afﬁrmative being, the nothing stands as void
outside the one as existent.
Being-for-itself, determined in this way as the one and the void, has
again acquired an existence. – The one and the void have their negative
self-reference as their common and simple terrain. The moments of being-
for-itself come out of this unity, become external to themselves; for through
the simple unity of the moments the determination of being comes into
play, and the unity itself thus withdraws to one side, is therefore lowered
to existence, and there it is confronted by its other determination standing
over against it, negation as such and likewise as the existence of the nothing,
as the void.
Remark
In this form of existence, the one is the stage of the category that made
its appearance among the ancients as the principle of atomism, according
to which the essence of things is the atom and the void (  or
  	  ).75 When developed in this form, abstraction
has gained a greater determinateness than the being of Parmenides and
the becoming of Heraclitus. As high as this abstraction rises in making
this simple determinateness of the one and the void the principle of all
things, by reducing the manifold of the world to this simple opposition
and daring to derive knowledge of it from the latter, just as easy is it for
ﬁgurative reﬂection to picture atoms here and the void next to them. It is no
wonder, therefore, that the atomistic principle has at all times held its own;
21.154
the equally trivial and external relation of composition that must be added to
it to attain the semblance of concreteness and multiplicity, is just as popular
as the atoms themselves and the void. The one and the void are being-for-
itself, the highest qualitative in-itselfness that has sunk to the most complete
externality; immediacy, or the being of the one, since it is the negation of
all otherness, is posited as no longer determinable and alterable; and in the
presence of its absolute obduracy all determination, every manifold and
every conjunction, therefore remains irreducibly external reference.
With the earliest thinkers, however, the atomistic principle did not
remain in this externality but also had, besides its abstraction, a speculative
determination inasmuch as the void was recognized as the source of move-
ment, and this entails quite a different connection of atom and void than the
mere juxtaposition and mutual indifference of these two determinations.
75 Hegel is referring here to Democritus and Leucippus. For Democritus, see Diels and Kranz, Vol. II,
68B9.

Being-for-itself
135
That the void is the source of movement does not have the trivial mean-
ing that something can only move into an empty space and not into an
already occupied one, for in the latter it would ﬁnd no room still left open;
understood in this way, the void would be only the presupposition or the
condition of movement, not its ground, and the movement itself would
be presupposed as already there while the essential point, its ground, is
forgotten. The view that the void constitutes the ground of movement
contains the more profound thought that the ground of becoming, of
unrest and self-movement, lies in the negative in general, which, in this
sense, is however to be taken as the true negativity of the inﬁnite. – The
void is the ground of movement only as the negative reference of the one to its
negative, to the one, that is, to its own self posited, however, as determinate
existent.
For the rest, the other determinations of the ancients concerning the
shape of the atoms, their position, the direction of their movement, are
arbitrary and external enough; they therefore stand in direct contradiction
to the fundamental determination of the atom. Physics, with its molecules
21.155
and particles, suffers from its use of the atom, the principle of extreme
externality, and therefore from an extreme lack of the concept, as does also
the theory of state that starts from the singular will of individuals.

=== Unit 23 ===
c. Many ones
Repulsion
The one and the void constitute the ﬁrst existence of being-for-itself. Each
of these moments has negation for its determination, and is posited at the
same time as an existence. In accordance with this determination, the one
and the void are each the reference of negation to negation as of an other
to its other: the one is negation in the determination of being; the void,
negation in the determination of non-being. Essentially, however, the one
is only self-reference as referring negation, that is, it is itself the same as the
void outside it is supposed to be. Both are, however, also posited as each
an afﬁrmative existence – the one as being-for-itself as such, the other as
indeterminate existence in general – and each as referring to the other as
to an other existence. Essentially, however, the being-for-itself of the one
is the ideality of the existence and of the other; it does not refer to an
other but only to itself. But inasmuch as the being-for-itself is ﬁxed as the
one, as existent for itself, as immediately present, its negative reference to
itself is at the same time reference to an existent; and since the reference
is just as much negative, that to which the being-for-itself refers remains

136
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
determined as an existence and as an other; as essentially self-reference, the
other is not indeterminate negation like the void, but is likewise a one. The
one is consequently a becoming of many ones.
Strictly speaking, however, this is not just a becoming; for becoming is
a transition of being into nothing; the one, by contrast, becomes only a
one. The one, as referred to, contains the negative as reference; it has this
reference, therefore, in it. Hence, instead of a becoming, the one’s own
immanent reference is, ﬁrst, present; and, second, since this reference is
21.156
negative and the one is at the same time an existent, the one repels itself
from itself. This negative reference of the one to itself is repulsion.
This repulsion, as thus the positing of many ones but through the one
itself, is the one’s own coming-forth-from-itself, but to such outside it as
are themselves only ones. This is repulsion according to the concept, as it
exists implicitly in itself. The second repulsion is distinguished from it. It
is the one that ﬁrst occurs to the representation of external reﬂection, not
as the generation of ones but only as the mutual holding off of ones which
are presupposed as already there. To be seen now is how the ﬁrst repulsion
that exists in itself determines itself as the second, the external repulsion.
We must ﬁrst establish the determinations that the many ones have as
such. The becoming of the many, or their being produced, immediately
vanishes as the product of a positing; what is produced are the ones, not
for another, but as inﬁnitely referring to themselves. The one repels only
itself from itself; it does not come to be but it already is; that which is
represented as the repelled is equally a one, an existent; repelling and being
repelled applies in like manner to both, and makes no difference.
The ones are thus presupposed with respect to each other – posited through
the repulsion of the one from itself; pre-supposed, posited as non-posited;
their being-posited is sublated, they are existents with respect to each other,
such as refer only to themselves.
Thus plurality appears not as an otherness, but as a determination com-
pletely external to the one. The one, in repelling itself, remains reference to
itself, just like that which is taken as repelled at the start. That the ones are
other to one another, that they are brought together in the determinateness
of plurality, does not therefore concern the one. If the plurality were a
reference of the ones to one another, the ones would then limit each other
and would have the being-for-other afﬁrmatively in them. Their connect-
ing reference (and this they have through their unity which is in itself ),
as posited here, is determined as none; it is again the previously posited
void. This void is their limit, but an external limit in which they are not
supposed to be for one another. The limit is that in which the limited are
21.157

Being-for-itself
137
just as much as are not; but the void is determined as pure non-being, and
this alone constitutes the limit of the ones.
The repulsion of the one from itself is the making explicit of what the
one is implicitly in itself; but, thus laid out as one-outside-the-other, inﬁnity
is here an inﬁnity that has externalized itself, and this it has done through
the immediacy of the inﬁnite, of the one. Inﬁnity is just as much the simple
reference of the one to the one as, on the contrary, the one’s absolute lack
of reference; it is the former according to the simple afﬁrmative reference
of the one to itself; it is the latter according to the same reference as
negative. Or again, the plurality of the ones is the one’s own positing of
the one; the one is nothing but the negative reference of the one to itself,
and this reference – hence the one itself – is the plural one. But equally,
plurality is utterly external to the one, for the one is precisely the sublating
of otherness; repulsion is its self-reference and simple equality with itself.
The plurality of the ones is inﬁnity as a contradiction that unconstrainedly
produces itself.
Remark
Mention was previously made of Leibnizian idealism.76 It can here be
added that that idealism proceeded from the ideating monad, which is
determined as being-for-itself, only up to the repulsion just considered,
and indeed, only up to plurality as such in which the ones are each only
for itself, indifferent to the existence and the being-for-itself of the others,
or in which, quite in general, the others are not for the one. The monad
is for itself the entirely closed-in world; it needs none of the others; but
this inner manifoldness which it possesses in its ideating activity alters
nothing in its determination as being for itself. Leibnizian idealism takes
up plurality immediately as something given; it does not conceptualize it
as a repulsion of monads; it has plurality, therefore, only on the side of its
abstract externality. Atomism lacks the concept of ideality; it does not grasp
the one as containing in it the two moments of being-for-itself and being-
21.158
for-it; it does not grasp it, therefore, as idealized, but only as simple, dry,
being-for-itself. It does, however, go beyond mere indifferent plurality; the
atoms do come to a further determination with respect to each other even
though, if the truth be told, inconsequentially; whereas, on the contrary,
in that indifferent independence of the monads plurality remains as a rigid
fundamental determination, so that the reference connecting them falls only
in the monad of monads, or in the philosopher who contemplates them.
76 Cf. above, 21.149.

138
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

=== Unit 24 ===
c. repulsion and attraction
a. Exclusion of the one
The many ones are each a being; their existence or their reference to
one another is a non-reference, it is external to them: the abstract void.
But they themselves are now this negative reference to themselves as to
existent others: the demonstrated contradiction, the inﬁnity posited in the
immediacy of being. With this, repulsion now ﬁnds immediately before it
that which is repelled by it. In this determination, it is an excluding; the one
repels from itself only the many not generated by it, the ones not posited
by it. This repelling is mutual or from all sides – relative, limited by the
being of the ones.
Plurality is not at ﬁrst posited otherness; limit is only the void, only that
in which the ones are not. But in the limit they also are; they are in the
void, or their repulsion is their common connecting reference.
This mutual repulsion is the posited existence of the many ones; it is not
their being-for-itself, in accordance with which they would be distinguished
21.159
as many only in a third, but is rather their own distinguishing which
preserves them. – They mutually negate themselves, posit one another as
being only for-one. But at the same time they negate this being only for-
one just as much; they repel the ideality that they have and are. – So the
moments which in ideality are absolutely united come apart. In its being-
for-itself, the one is also for-one; but this one, for which it is, is itself; its
distinguishing from itself is immediately sublated. But in the plurality the
distinguished one has a being; the being-for-one as has been determined
in exclusion is therefore a being-for-other. Each thus comes to be repelled
by an other, is sublated and made into a one which is not for itself but
for-one, and an other one at that.
The being-for-itself of the many ones thus shows itself to be their self-
preservation through the mediation of their mutual repulsion in which
they sublated themselves reciprocally and posit the others as mere being-
for-another. But the self-preservation consists at the same time in repelling
this ideality and positing the ones as not being for-an-other. This self-
preservation of the ones through their negative reference to one another is,
however, rather their dissolution.
The ones not only are but maintain themselves through their recipro-
cal exclusion. First, it is in their being, and indeed their being-in-itself as
contrasted with their reference to the other, that they should now have a
ﬁrm point of support for their diversity as against their being negated; this

Being-for-itself
139
in-itselfness rests on their being ones. But they all are this; in their being-in-
itself, instead of having there their ﬁrm point of support for their diversity,
they are all the same. Second, their existence and their way of relating
to one another, that is, their positing themselves as one, is their recipro-
cal negating; this, however, is likewise one and the same determination of
all through which they therefore posit themselves as identical; just as, by
being in themselves the same, the ideality that should be posited in them
through others is their own, and they thus repel just as little. – According
to their being and positing, they are, consequently, only one afﬁrmative
unity.
21.160
This consideration regarding the ones – that from either side of their
determination, whether they just are or refer to one another, they show
themselves to be only one and the same, indistinguishable – is a comparison
that belongs to us. – Also to be seen, therefore, is what is posited in them
in their mutual reference itself. – They are – this much is presupposed
in this reference – and they are only inasmuch as they negate themselves
reciprocally and at the same time keep away this ideality, their being
negated, from themselves, that is, they negate the reciprocal negating.
But they are only inasmuch as they negate, and so, since their reciprocal
negating is negated, their being is negated. To be sure, since they are,
nothing would be negated through this negating which for them is only
something external; this negating of the other rebounds off them, coming
their way only by striking their surface. And yet, they turn back upon
themselves only by negating the others; they are only as this mediation,
this turning back of theirs is their self-preservation and their being-for-
itself. Since their negating is ineffectual because of the resistance offered by
the others, whether as existents or as negating, they do not return back to
themselves, do not preserve themselves, and so are not.
It was previously remarked that the ones themselves are each a one like
any other.77 This is not just a matter of our connecting them by way of
reference, of bringing them together externally; repulsion is itself a referring;
the one that excludes the ones refers itself to them, to the ones, that is,
to itself. The negative relating of the ones to one another is consequently
only a coming-together-with-oneself. This identity in which their repelling
crosses over is the sublation of their diversity and externality which they
should have rather asserted with respect to each other by excluding each
other.
This self-positing-in-a-one of the many ones is attraction.
77 Cf. above, 21.159.

140
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Remark
Driven to the extreme of the one as being-for-itself, self-subsistence is an
abstract, formal self-subsistence that destroys itself. It is the ultimate, most
stubborn error, one which takes itself as the ultimate truth, whether it
assumes the more concrete form of abstract freedom, of pure “I,” and
further still of evil. It is the freedom which so misconceives itself as to
place its essence in this abstraction, and, in thus shutting itself up within
itself, ﬂatters itself that it attains itself in all purity. This self-subsistence, to
determine it further, is the error of considering its own essence negatively
and of relating itself to it negatively. It is thus a negative relating to itself
which, while wanting to gain its own being, destroys it – and this, his
doing, is only the manifestation of the nullity of the doing. Reconciliation
is the recognition that that towards which the negative relating is directed
21.161
is rather its essence, and this is only in the desisting from the negativity of
its being-for-itself rather than in holding fast to it.
It is an ancient proposition that the one is many and especially that the
many is one. It should again be observed in this connection that, as expressed
in propositions, the truth of the one and the many appears in inadequate
form; such a truth is to be grasped and expressed only as a becoming, as a
process, a repulsion and attraction – not as being, in the way the latter is
posited in a proposition as inert unity. Earlier mention was made recalling
Plato’s dialectic in the Parmenides on the derivation of the many from
the one, speciﬁcally from the proposition: the one is.78 It is the internal
dialectic of the concept that has been expounded; it is easiest to grasp the
dialectic of the proposition, that the many is one, as external reﬂection;
and, inasmuch as the subject matter also, the many, is a mutual externality,
reﬂection may indeed be external here. This comparison of the many with
one another immediately shows that each is absolutely determined just as
any other; each is a one, each a one of many; each is by excluding the
others – so that they are absolutely the same; absolutely one determination
is present. This is a matter of fact, and all that needs to be done is simply to
grasp the fact. If in its stubbornness the understanding refuses to do it, it is
only because it also has distinction in mind, and rightly so; but distinction
is not left out because of that fact, as surely as the fact is no less there despite
distinction. One could, as it were, reassure the understanding concerning
this simple grasp of the fact of unity that distinction will also come in
again.
78 Cf. above, 21.87.

Being-for-itself
141
